PICAchooser (the program)
=========================

Basically, PICAchooser loads the results of a MELODIC ICA run and lets
you step through the components, look at them, and decide if you want to
keep them or discard them. After you load the dataset, you get a window
showing the active IC component (both the timecourse and the spatial
map), the power spectrum of the active IC component, and the motion
timecourses for comparison. By default, components are flagged to be
kept (and the timecourses are in green\*).


Usage
-----

usage: PICAchooser runmode [options]

A program to review (and alter) melodic component selections.

positional arguments:
  runmode               Analysis mode. Valid choices are "melodic",
                        "groupmelodic" "aroma", and "fix". In
                        melodic mode, the default output file is
                        named "badcomponents.txt" and will be
                        written to MELODICDIR as comma separated
                        integers. In groupmelodic mode, the default
                        output file is named "goodcomponents.txt"
                        (you are more interested in which components
                        should be retained) and will be written to
                        MELODICDIR as newline separated integers
                        (starting from 0). In aroma mode, the file
                        "classified_motion_ICs.txt" must exist in
                        the parent of MELODICDIR; by default the
                        output will be written to
                        "classified_motion_ICs_revised.txt" in the
                        same directory. In fix mode, the default
                        output file is named "hand_labels_noise.txt"
                        and will be written to MELODICDIR as comma
                        separated integers with square brackets
                        surrounding the line.

optional arguments:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit

Standard input file location specification.  For certain runmodes, 
one of these will be sufficient to fully specify all file locations.:
  --featdir FEATDIR     The FEAT directory associated with this
                        MELODIC run.
  --melodicdir MELODICDIR
                        The .ica directory for this MELODIC run.

Nonstandard input file location specification.  Setting any 
of these overrides any location inferred from --melodicdir or --featdir.:
  --backgroundfile BGFILE
                        The anatomic file on which to display the
                        ICs (usually found in
                        FEATDIR/reg/example_func.nii.gz),
  --funcfile FUNCFILE   The functional file to be filtered (usually
                        found in FEATDIR/filtered_func_data.nii.gz),
  --motionfile MOTIONFILE
                        The anatomic file on which to display the
                        ICs (usually found in
                        FEATDIR/mc/prefiltered_func_data_mcf.par).
                        If the file has a .tsv extension, assume it
                        is an fmriprep confounds file.
  --ICfile ICFILE       The independent component file produced by
                        MELODIC (usually found in
                        MELODICDIR/melodic_IC.nii.gz).
  --ICmask ICMASK       The independent component mask file produced
                        by MELODIC (usually found in
                        MELODICDIR/mask.nii.gz).
  --timecoursefile MIXFILE
                        The timecourses of the independant
                        components (usually found in
                        MELODICDIR/melodic_mix),
  --ICstatsfile STATSFILE
                        The melodic stats file (usually found in
                        MELODICDIR/melodic_ICstats),

Other arguments:
  --initfile INITFILE   The name of an initial bad component file
                        (in aroma mode, this overrides the default
                        input file for AROMA).
  --outputfile OUTPUTFILE
                        Where to write the bad component file (this
                        overrides the default output file name).
  --filteredfile FILTEREDFILE
                        The name of the filtered NIFTI file. If this
                        is set, then when the bad component file is
                        written, the command to generate the
                        filtered file will be printed to the
                        terminal window.
  --displaythresh DISPLAYTHRESH
                        z threshold for the displayed ICA
                        components. Default is 2.3.
  --spatialroi XMIN XMAX YMIN YMAX ZMIN ZMAX
                        Only read in image data within the specified
                        ROI. Set MAX to -1 to go to the end of that
                        dimension.

Configuration arguments:
  --keepcolor KEEPCOLOR
                        Set the color of timecourses to be kept
                        (default is "g").
  --discardcolor DISCARDCOLOR
                        Set the color of timecourses to discard
                        (default is "r").
  --transmotlimits LOWERLIM UPPERLIM
                        Override the "normal" limits of
                        translational motion from the values in the
                        configuration file to LOWERLIM-UPPERLIM mm.
  --rotmotlimits LOWERLIM UPPERLIM
                        Override the "normal" limits of rotations
                        motion from the values in the configuration
                        file to LOWERLIM-UPPERLIM radians.
  --scalemotiontodata   Scale motion plots to the motion timecourse
                        values rather than to the limit lines.
  --componentlinewidth LINEWIDTH
                        Override the component line width (in
                        pixels) in the configuration file with
                        LINEWIDTH.
  --motionlinewidth LINEWIDTH
                        Override the motion timecourse line widths
                        (in pixels) in the configuration file with
                        LINEWIDTH.
  --motionlimitlinewidth LINEWIDTH
                        Override the line widths of the motion limit
                        lines (in pixels) in the configuration file
                        with LINEWIDTH.

Debugging arguments:
  --verbose             Output exhaustive amounts of information
                        about the internal workings of PICAchooser.
                        You almost certainly don't want this.


Example
-------
Run PICAchooser to look at a series of independent components and assign them a rating:
::

    PICAchooser RUNMODE --featdir FEATDIRECTORY --melodicdir MELODICDIRECTORY


You'll then get a window that looks like this:

.. figure:: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/bbfrederick/picachooser/master/images/picachooser_screenshot.png
   :alt: PICAchooser screenshot

   PICAchooser screenshot
Controls
--------

To toggle whether the current component should be kept or discarded,
press the up or down arrow key. You can change back and forth as much as
you want. Components to be discarded are in red, ones to be kept are in
green\*.

To go to the next (or previous) component, press the right (or left)
arrow. You'll wrap around if you hit the end.

Press the escape key at any time to save the current version of the
component list. The component list is saved automatically when you quit.

Input file specification
------------------------

For most datasets, you only need to specify the FEAT directory where the
preprocessing was done, and the MELODIC directory where the ICA analysis
was performed, and PICAchooser can find all the files it needs to let
you do component selection. In some cases, however (looking at you,
fmriprep), the files you need to find can be scattered all over the
place, with different names (and even different formats). In those
cases, you can specify the name and location of every one of the files
separately (anything you set with these options will override the
default locations calculated from the FEATDIR and MELODICDIR).

Other command line options
--------------------------

``--initfile`` lets you read in a bad component file from anywhere to
use as a starting point in your classification. It's the normal behavior
in aroma mode (reading from MELODICDIR/../classified\_motion\_ICs.txt),
but you can do it in any mode with this flag, and it will override the
aroma classifications.

``--outputfile`` lets you write the bad component file anywhere you
want, rather than just the default location.

``--filteredfile`` specifies where the filtered file would go. If this
is set, PICAchooser prints the fsl\_regfilt command to filter the data
using the currently tagged bad components whenever the file is saved
(when the escape key is pressed, or when you quit).

``--displaythresh`` sets the z-threshold for the component maps.

``--spatialroi XMIN XMAX YMIN YMAX ZMIN ZMAX`` lets you zoom in on a
cubic ROI within the NIFTI dataset. Useful if you did a constrained ICA
on a particular brain region. Set the MAX value to -1 to go to the
maximum value for a given dimension. These are voxel indices, with 0
being the first element of each dimension.

\* Configuration changes
------------------------

You can use ``--keepcolor``, ``--discardcolor``, ``--transmotlimits``
and ``--rotmotlimits`` to alter display behavior for the current run
(useful if you're using the docker container). To change things
semi-permanently, edit the file ${HOME}/.picachooser.json. This file is
created with default values if it is not present. You can use any valid
python color specification string for color values, e.g. "r", "ff0000",
or "FF0000" could all be used for red.

``--componentlinewidth``, ``--motionlinewidth``, and
``--motionlimitlinewidth`` can all be used to specify various linewidths
(in pixels) for the various plots. Useful if you want to make a
screenshot pretty for a figure.

``--scalemotiontodata`` autoscales the motion plots to the motion
timecourse values rather than to fixed limits.

The motion plots have two dotted lines to indicate "normal" motion
limits (by default +/-2.5 mm for translation and +/-0.04 radians for
rotation). The locations of these lines are set by "transmotlimits" and
"rotmotlimits" in the configuration file. Setting "motionplotstyle" to 0
will remove the lines, and fix the y range of the plots to the limit
values. Set the limit line color using "motionlimitcolor".

Outputs
-------

In melodic mode, the default output file is named "badcomponents.txt";
components flagged for removal will be written to MELODICDIR as comma
separated integers. Component numbers start at 1 (for compatibility with
fsl\_regfilt).

In groupmelodic mode, the default output file is named
"goodcomponents.txt"; components which are worth keeping will be written
to MELODICDIR as integers, one per line. Component numbers start at 0
(for compatibility with standard NIFTI array indexing).

In aroma mode, the file "classified\_motion\_ICs.txt" must exist in the
parent of MELODICDIR; by default the output will be written to
"classified\_motion\_ICs\_revised.txt" in the same directory. Component
numbers start at 1 (for compatibility with AROMA numbering convention).

In fix mode, the default output file is named "hand\_labels\_noise.txt"
and will be written to MELODICDIR as comma separated integers with
square brackets surrounding the line. Component numbers start at 1 (for
compatibility with FIX numbering convention).

Reprocessing fmriprep AROMA analyses
------------------------------------

fmriprep reformats things to conform to BIDS standard naming conventions
and formatting, so file locations, names, and formats are a little
weird. However, you can check components as long as you used an external
work directory (you set the "-w" flag during analysis).

A concrete example: I have an analysis in BIDSDIR, and used the option
"-w WORKDIR" when I ran fmriprep (with AROMA processing enabled). Say I
have a functional run, sub-015\_ses-001\_task-rest\_run-1\_bold.nii.gz
that I want to redo the AROMA processing on. First off, I need to find
my ICfile and IC mask file. They don't get copied into the derivatives
directory, as they are intermediate files, not analysis products. It
turns out the entire melodic directory does exist in the work directory.
In this particular case, if I set:

``--melodicdir ${WORKDIR}/fmriprep_wf/single_subject_015_wf/func_preproc_ses_001_task_rest_run_1_wf/ica_aroma_wf/melodic``

then PICAchooser can find the ICfile and ICmask.

The background file is also in this directory:

``--backgroundfile ${WORKDIR}/fmriprep_wf/single_subject_015_wf/func_preproc_ses_001_task_rest_run_1_wf/ica_aroma_wf/melodic/mean.nii.gz``

Everything else can be found in the functional output directory for this
session:

``FUNCDIR=${BIDSDIR}/derivatives/fmriprep/sub-015/ses-001/func``

By setting the following options:

``--initfile ${FUNCDIR}/sub-015_ses-001_task-rest_run-1_AROMAnoiseICs.csv --funcfile ${FUNCDIR}/sub-015_ses-001_task-rest_run-1_space-MNI152NLin6Asym_desc-preproc_bold.nii.gz --motionfile ${FUNCDIR}/sub-015_ses-001_task-rest_run-1_desc-confounds_regressors.tsv``

As a bonus, if you also set:

``--filteredfile ${FUNCDIR}/sub-015_ses-001_task-rest_run-1_space-MNI152NLin6Asym_desc-AROMAnonaggr_bold.nii.gz``

Then when you save your bad component file, you'll see the command
necessary to refilter your data printed to the terminal window. I
haven't investigated far enough to know when the smoothing implied in
the name of the exisiting filtered file comes from, so there may be some
other steps to get to exactly the output you'd get from fmriprep...

melodicomp
==========

melodicomp handles a slightly different task - its job is to allow for
rapid comparison of two melodic analyses. In this case, you want to
match components between the two analyses (the chances that you'll get
the same components in the same order between two analyses is basicaly
zero, so you need to match them up). We do this with a spatial
cross-correlation - higher cross-correlation means the the components
look more like each other. This works surprisingly well. We then display
the components side by side.

Usage
-----

usage: melodicomp ICfile1 ICfile2 [options]
melodicomp: error: the following arguments are required: ICfile1, ICfile2
usage: melodicomp ICfile1 ICfile2 [options]

A program to compare two sets of melodic components.

positional arguments:
  ICfile1               The first IC component file. This will be
                        the exemplar, and for each component, the
                        closest component in ICfile2 will be
                        selected for comparison.
  ICfile2               The second IC component file. Components in
                        this file will be selected to match
                        components in ICfile1.

optional arguments:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit

Nonstandard input file location specification.  Setting these overrides the locations assumed from ICfile1.:
  --backgroundfile BGFILE
                        The anatomic file on which to display the
                        ICs (by default assumes a file called
                        'mean.nii.gz' in the same directory as
                        ICfile1.))
  --maskfile ICMASK     The independent component mask file produced
                        by MELODIC (by default assumes a file called
                        'mask.nii.gz' in the same directory as
                        ICfile1.)
  --ICstatsfile1 STATSFILE
                        The melodic stats file (by default called
                        'melodic_ICstats' in the same directory as
                        ICfile1),
  --ICstatsfile2 STATSFILE
                        The melodic stats file (by default called
                        'melodic_ICstats' in the same directory as
                        ICfile2),

Other arguments:
  --corrthresh CORRTHRESH
                        z threshold for the displayed ICA
                        components. Default is 2.3.
  --outputfile OUTPUTFILE
                        Where to write the list of corresponding
                        components (default is
                        'correspondingcomponents.txt' in the same
                        directory as ICfile1
  --sortedfile SORTEDFILE
                        Save the components in ICfile2, sorted to
                        match the components of ICfile1, in the file
                        SORTEDFILE.
  --spatialroi XMIN XMAX YMIN YMAX ZMIN ZMAX
                        Only read in image data within the specified
                        ROI. Set MAX to -1 to go to the end of that
                        dimension.
  --displaythresh DISPLAYTHRESH
                        z threshold for the displayed ICA
                        components. Default is 2.3.
  --label1 LABEL1       Label to give to file 1 components in
                        display. Default is 'File 1'.
  --label2 LABEL2       Label to give to file 2 components in
                        display. Default is 'File 2'.

Debugging arguments:
  --verbose             Output exhaustive amounts of information
                        about the internal workings of melodicomp.
                        You almost certainly don't want this.


Controls
--------

As with PICAchooser, this is all keyboard driven. Use the right and left
arrows to step through components. In melodicomp, the first file
specified on the command line is considered the reference file - we go
through all the components of that file and display them on the left,
and show the component from the second file that matches best on the
right. The number of components in the files do NOT have to match (but
their spatial dimensions, voxel sizes, and background images do). Using
the up and down arrows toggles between sorting based on the native order
of components in file 1, and sorting in descending order of
cross-correlation coefficient. Use the "a", "c", and "s" keys to switch
between axial, coronal, and sagittal views. "b" is for blink - this
swaps the right and left images. It takes essentially no time, so it
makes it very clear how and where the components are changing. Try it!

By default, pairs of components with correlation coefficients lower than
0.5 are considered poor matches, and are indicated with red text in the
annotations. The correlation threshold can be set on the command line.

Output
------

On exit (or when you hit escape), melodicomp will output a text file
with the component of the first melodic file , the matching component
from the second file, and the correlation coefficient between them on
each line. Component numbers start from 0. The order of lines in the
file is the same as the current sort order in the GUI.
